For the Javascript/HTML:
	Editable questions
	Editable correct answers (with warning?)
	Suggest a list of possible answers (i.e. @fileans) – button to display them?
	Function to save to a .txt/.doc/.docx/.html (completed or partially edited)
	Allow for a completed saved file to be opened up and edited again, also allow for editing directly from the text file (opening it up as an editable html shouldn’t be a problem because we have a .txt we can re-parse into a .html with text boxes and such, we just need a .exe or something to run that will do that)
	When a finalized copy is saved, generate an answer key
	Make it prettier

Text to HTML script:
	Store each question in an array
For the question generator:
	Periods for acronyms addressed? (so they aren’t considered new sentences)
	Percent symbol means it’s not a year
	Get all subroutines operating on case insensitivity
	Perhaps make a variable to switch between case sensitive/insensitive
	Make more modular
	Prevent qword from grabbing just part of a word (anchor to the last non punctuation character)
	Make qword work for phrases with input qword=“I hate Shamwow” (problem is how to generate other phrase answers)
	Perhaps just make a qfile call with that phrase?
	Generate better answers for qfile (via proximity/frequency)
	Apply part-of-speech rule to qfile answer generation when applicable
	Confirm that things in lists aren’t being repeated due to capitalization
	See if cased dictionary produces better results and decide which type of dictionary to use
	Look into properly using anchors in regex’s instead of storing everything with a space around it
	Make designated question words work when they have punctuation attached to them (like parens, brackets, quotes, etc.)
	Make sure it works for multiple punctuation attachments I.E. (“Home Island”)
	Create sub routines for common OUT sequences (partially done?)
	Make most arrays into hashes and examine performance?
	Generate better answers for default and qword (i.e., stabilize have other answers with ize suffix)
	Change timeprepsregex to be the same format as the other regex’s
	create a rating system of our confidence in the quiz based on whether or not we were able to match parts of speech, or whether we had to dip into qfile, etc

Things to be done for a teacher editor:
	File selector (implement .doc and .docx compatibility)
	Options for types of questions on the file
	Search for a word, set of words/phrases, years, countries, important words
	Allow for the user to input something like (Koala Bear, Grizzly Bear, Elephant) and convert it into a qfile search
	Run the script, and bring up the editable .html file from the file/options selection (have a “Processing…” message appear?)
	Save the editable file to a more permanent one (but still have it be able to be opened up as an editable version again, separate .exe? or another option when you run the main .exe?)
	Create a .exe with everything all wrapped up together and no system dependencies (except maybe no macs?)

For the webpage:
	password protected
	browse for file to run perl on
	upload only text files
	whole shebang open firefox
	why isn't the fucking perl script running when the other one is?


Other shit:
	Clean up git directory
	Get a past and present Country list

